---
title: The Multi-touch Table of August 23, 1966
permalink: /2011/05/august23-multitouch/
---

*This post is part of a series describing the
[August 23, 1966](/2011/05/august23/) project.*

The multi-touch table created for the project is a rear diffused illumination
design, and is housed in a core‐ten steel cabinet with recessed cooling fans and
an access panel on the rear vertical wall. The touch surface is a 1/2"
polycarbonate sheet with an adhesive projection film applied to the underside
(acting as a diffuser for the projected image).

Infrared light is projected at the diffuser from below (inside the cabinet) the
touch surface. The table used an array of six multiple LED lamps. When an object
touches the surface it reflects more light than the diffuser or objects far away
from the surface. The change in light is detected by a webcam placed inside the
cabinet, and the signal processed by our software as user input.

## Multi-touch Software

The multi-touch table used [The Beta](http://ccv.nuigroup.com/), from the NUI
Group, to process the video stream from the webcam. The Beta, tbeta for short,
is an open source tool that analyzes video to find tracking data for objects it
recognizes as fingers or cursor devices. The software provides a great deal of
control over the video parameters (high-pass filter, amplification, threshold,
etc.) that adapts well to many types of multi-touch displays.

Tbeta outputs the tracking data using the [TUIO protocol](http://tuio.org/),
which is an open framework for receiving input events in various programming
environments. For this project, the TUIO events sent by tbeta were received
using the open source Java TUIO library in a
[Processing sketch](https://github.com/peplin/august23/blob/master/src/gallery/MultitouchClient/TuioController.pde).

The [Twoverse post](/2011/05/august23-twoverse/) includes some screenshots of
the user interface displayed on the multi-touch table.

### Results

Despite careful calibration and testing in our workspace, the final move to the
gallery threw the multi-touch table out of alignment and with the remaining
time, we were unable to make it sufficiently responsive enough to user
interaction. The distribution of IR light on the table's surface was difficult
to control, and hot spots had the habit of throwing the exposure of the webcam
off and confusing Tbeta.

Although we used the surface as a display, gallery visitors had to use a
traditional mouse to interact with the galaxy.

*Continue to the next section, details of the
[Wiremap](/2011/05/august23-wiremap/) display.*

## Other August Articles

* [August Overview](/2011/05/august23/)
* [Twoverse](/2011/05/august23-twoverse/), the core software backend
* [Wiremap](/2011/05/august23-wiremap/)
* [Pulse Oximeter (Heartbeat Monitor)](/2011/05/august23-pulse-oximeter/)
* [Audio Recordings](/2011/05/august23-audio/)
