---
layout: post
title: A Google Voice Landline with Asterisk
permalink: /2011/05/google-voice-asterisk/
---

Inspired by a recent
[Maximum PC article](http://www.maximumpc.com/article/how-tos/how_build_your_own_home_phone_server),
I recently set up a land line telephone that supports both incoming and outgoing
calls from my Google Voice number. I opted to use an installation of Asterisk in
on a standard Ubuntu server instead of using one of the pre-built PBX
Linux distributions. The process involved enough fiddling and Google searching
that I thought a summary of how my setup works could be helpful for others.

You can probably guess by the recent addition of calling to Gmail that Google is
using VoIP protocols to shuffle Voice traffic around. Thankfully, they're
somewhat standard, and Asterisk recently added official support for it. Just
like the calling feature in Gmail, an Asterisk server can connect to Google and
send/receive calls.

## Chef Cookbook

I've written a [Chef cookbook][] that does most of this configuration
automatically. I'll go over the basics of the cookbook if you don't use Chef.

[Chef cookbook]: https://github.com/peplin/asterisk-cookbook

## Install the Package

The best place to get the Asterisk package is the official asterisk.org
repository. Add it to your `/etc/apt/sources.list`:

    deb http://packages.asterisk.org/deb natty main

Then install the PGP key and update your package lists:

    sudo apt-key adv --keyserver subkeys.pgp.net --recv-keys 175E41DF
    sudo apt-get update

Finally, install the two packages we need:

    sudo apt-get install asterisk-1.8 asterisk-dahdi

## Configuration

There are five configuration files to change:

### `/etc/asterisk/sip.conf`

* Set `localnet` to the IP range of your LAN, e.g.
    `192.168.1.0/255.255.255.0`
* `tcpenable = 'yes'`
* `disallow = 'all'`
* `allow = ...` for `ulaw`, `gsm`, `ilbc`, and `speex`
* `externip` must be set to your external (i.e. WAN) IP address

Finally, in the `[authentication]` section, add the details for your user
account:

    [DESIRED_ASTERISK_USERNAME]
    secret=YOUR_DESIRED_PASSWORD
    type=friend
    callerid="Your Name <username>"
    host=dynamic
    context=outbound

### `/etc/asterisk/extensions.conf`

This file sets up all routing paths for getting calls from Google to your user.
This configuration is probably a bit more than is required (and is a mashup of a
few different blog posts), but it's working for me at the moment:

    [general]
    static=yes
    writeprotect=no
    clearglobalvars=no

    [globals]
    CONSOLE=Console/dsp             ; Console interface for demo
    IAXINFO=guest                   ; IAXtel username/password
    TRUNK=Zap/G2                    ; Trunk interface
    TRUNKMSD=1                  ; MSD digits to strip (usually 1 or 0)

    [default]
    exten => s,1,Set(CALLERID(name)=${DB(cidname/${CALLERID(num)})})
    exten => s,n,Dial(SIP/YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 10)
    exten => s,n, Hangup
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 1, Dial(SIP/YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 10)

    [google-in]
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 1, GotoIf(${DB_EXISTS(gv_dialout/channel)}?bridged)
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, n, NoOp(Callerid  ${CALLERID(name)})
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, n, Set(CALLERID(num)=${SHIFT(CALLERID(name),@)})
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, n, Set(CALLERID(name)=${DB(cidname/${CALLERID(num)})})
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, n, Dial(SIP/YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 20, aD(:1))
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, n(bridged),Bridge(${DB_DELETE(gv_dialout/channel)}, p)

    [outbound]
    include => seven-digit
    include => local-devices
    include => tollfree
    include => talk-gmail-outbound
    include => talk-numeric-outbound
    include => dial-uri

    [local-devices]
    exten => YOUR_ASTERISK_EXTENSION_NUM, 1, Dial(SIP/YOUR_ASTERISK_USERNAME, 10)

    [tollfree]
    exten => _411, 1, Dial(SIP/18004664411@proxy.ideasip.com,60)
    exten => _1800NXXXXXX,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@proxy.ideasip.com,60)
    exten => _1888NXXXXXX,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@proxy.ideasip.com,60)
    exten => _1877NXXXXXX,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@proxy.ideasip.com,60)
    exten => _1866NXXXXXX,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@proxy.ideasip.com,60)

    [seven-digit]
    exten => _NXXXXXX,1,Set(CALLERID(dnid)=1512${CALLERID(dnid)})
    exten => _NXXXXXX,n,Goto(1512${EXTEN},1)
    exten => _NXXNXXXXXX,1,Set(CALLERID(dnid)=1${CALLERID(dnid)})
    exten => _NXXNXXXXXX,n,Goto(1${EXTEN},1)

    [talk-gmail-outbound]
    exten => _[a-z].@gmail.com,1,Dial(gtalk/google/${EXTEN}@gmail.com)
    exten => _[A-Z].@gmail.com,1,Dial(gtalk/google/${EXTEN}@gmail.com)

    [talk-numeric-outbound]
    exten => _1XXXXXXXXXX,1,Dial(gtalk/google/+${EXTEN}@voice.google.com)
    exten => _+1XXXXXXXXXX,1,Dial(gtalk/google/+${EXTEN}@voice.google.com)

    [dial-uri]
    exten => _[a-z].,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@${SIPDOMAIN},120,tr)
    exten => _[A-Z].,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@${SIPDOMAIN},120,tr)
    exten => _X.,1,Dial(SIP/${EXTEN}@${SIPDOMAIN},120,tr)

### `/etc/asterisk/jabber.conf`

This file configures the authentication details for your Google account (Jabber
is the protocol used by GTalk, and it's technically how you log in). This file
contains your Google password, so make sure it's only readable by your user or
root.

    [general]
    autoregister=yes

    [google]
    type=client
    serverhost=talk.google.com
    username=YOUR_GOOGLE_ACCOUNT@gmail.com/Talk
    secret=YOUR_GOOGLE_PASSWORD
    port=5222
    statusmessage=Asterisk Server - Not a Human
    status=xaway

### `/etc/asterisk/gtalk.conf`

Finally, this file links together your Google account (defined previous in the
`jabber.conf` file) with Google Voice.


    [general]
    context=google-in		; Context to dump call into
    allowguest=yes

    [guest]			; special account for options on guest account
    disallow=all
    allow=ulaw

    [gtalk]
    username=YOUR_GOOGLE_USER@gmail.com
    disallow=all
    allow=ulaw
    context=google-in
    connection=google

## Google Voice Configuration

The last step is to enable Google Talk as an extension in your Google Voice
account. This should be pretty straightforward.

## Caveats

There are a few known issues with this setup.

The Google account you use will appear logged into Google Talk anytime the
server is running. Messages sent to the server will just get lost in the ether.
I set up a separate Google account with my Voice number so this wouldn't be an
issue. If you already have an established Voice number that you don't want to
change, another option is to create a second Google account for chat only -
although then you lose the ability to use the inlined chat in Gmail. If anyone
has a better solution for this, I'd love to know about it.

Incoming calls are somewhat unreliable. Sometimes the phone will ring, but after
picking it up you just get dead air. My cell phone keeps ringing when this
happens so I'm still able to pick up the call. It's annoying, however, and I'd
love to find the root cause.

I suspect that Google's requirement that you hit "1" when accepting a call via
SIP is the problem. This Asterisk config attempts to do that automatically for
you, but it took me quite a while to nail down that process and it's most likely
still not working. Sometimes jabbing "1" when I get dead air seems to wake it
up, but not every time.

Otherwise, outgoing calls work quite well. The only issue I've ever had is if
I'm using all of my upstream bandwidth doing something else, but that's not
unique to Asterisk. Some QoS controls in your router should help out with that.

